LINCOLN

1. Bowling Lake (1956-58 -- Present)
—“Dug out by Air Force volunteers in the late 1950s, this lake served as a recreational area for airmen and their families that was closer to the base than similar venues in the city.” 
— https://www.lincolnafb.org/BowlingLake.php
-	“The blue-clad flyers are in the process of building themselves two lakes, one for fishing, one for boating, each designed to fulfill the needs of some 6,000 men stationed at the Base.” (“LAFB Personnel to Get ‘Built-in’ Recreation Aid,” Lincoln Sunday Journal and Star, 21 April 1957) 
-	An “Aqua-Air Show” celebrated the dedication of the 85-acre Bowling Lake Recreation Area June 19-22, 1958.
-	“Purpose of the recreation area is to provide on-base recreation and to aid in the retention of high skilled airmen, base officials say…Brig. Gen. Perry M. Hoisington II, 818th Air Division Commander, said the areas are needed due to the SAC alert concept which requires the men be constantly ready in the case of aggression” (“Show Will Kickoff Dedication of Lake” Lincoln Sunday Journal and Star, 13 April 1958).
o	Built in the shadow of the Cold War – readiness posture
-	“Feature attraction of the 4-day outdoor show will be the Tommy Bartlett Water Thrill Show from Sarasota, Fla., and an Acro-Jet Air Show by the Air Force ‘Thunderbirds’ and Air National Guard ‘Minutemen’” (“Show Will Kickoff Dedication of Lake” Lincoln Sunday Journal and Star, 13 April 1958).
-	“Proceeds from the Aqua-Air Show will be used for the Dayroom Improvement Fund at the base” (“Show Will Kickoff Dedication of Lake” Lincoln Sunday Journal and Star, 13 April 1958).
-	“SAC’s goal is to have 1/3 of its combat capability constantly ready to maintain the deterrent posture necessary to discourage any potential aggressor. However, the remaining SAC force must be ready to go into action immediately after warning is received” (“Aqua-Air Show Slated: Bowling Lake at LAFB To Host Event,” Lincoln Journal Star, 22 May 1958). 
-	Lake was “christened” on 24 May 1958 with boats that propelled Brig. Gen. Perry M. Hoisington II, Hollywood star Andy Devine, as well as Sueleal Thompson (crowned Miss Lincoln) and Sherry Johnson (crowned Miss Nebraska) (“Bowling Lake Gets Official ‘Christening’,” Lincoln Sunday Journal and Star, 25 May 1958).
-	Tickets were sold door-to-door to presumably help offset the cost of the massive show/celebration/dedication
o	“Nearly 200,000 persons are expected to attend the show at the new Bowling Lake recreation area at the base.” 
o	Newspapers called the show the “largest event of its kind ever held in the neighboring 7-state area” 
o	(“Nearly 200,000 to Attend LAFB Aqua-Air Show,” Lincoln Sunday Journal and Star, 08 June 1958) 
-	Massive campaign to prove the project is worth the money to citizens
o	Framed in Cold War language, financial language
o	“Think of the leverage on combat readiness and think of the cost down the drain every time one of these crew members or enlisted men decides not to re-enlist” (“More or Less Personal,” Lincoln Evening Journal and Nebraska State Journal, 09 June 1958) 
o	“Beauty from a Dump” (“More or Less Personal,” Lincoln Evening Journal and Nebraska State Journal, 09 June 1958). 
-	By 10 June 1958, newspapers reported that door-to-door ticket drives sold 25,000 tickets to the dedication show (“Aqua-Air Show Sale Here Exceeds 25,000…LAFB Appreciation Day,” The Lincoln Star, 10 June 1958).
o	~12,000 tickets in Lincoln (citizens) 
o	13,409 tickets sold on the base
-	“Civilian and military promoters of the new LAFB lake and its grand opening ceremonies wound up a 3-day tour to 31 Nebraska towns with a parade through downtown Lincoln earlier Monday and ceremonies at the City Hall…observing Air Base Appreciation Day” (“Aqua-Air Show Sale Here Exceeds 25,000…LAFB Appreciation Day,” The Lincoln Star, 10 June 1958).
-	

The northeast portion of Lincoln Air Force Base was transformed from a “dump” into a spot of “beauty” in the late 1950s. Air base officials billed the project as a Cold War necessity. While under construction, newspapers constantly reported Bowling Lake’s dual purpose: “[T]he recreation area is to provide on-base recreation and to aid in the retention of high skilled airmen, base officials say…Brig. Gen. Perry M. Hoisington II, 818th Air Division Commander, said the areas are needed due to the SAC [Strategic Air Command] alert concept which requires the men be constantly ready in the case of aggression.” Upon its completion in 1958, Bowling Lake hosted a star-studded “christening” ceremony, a four-day “Aqua-Air Show” extravaganza, and a solemn ceremony where the statue of Capt. Russell Bowling was unveiled by his family. 

(“Show Will Kickoff Dedication of Lake” Lincoln Sunday Journal and Star, 13 April 1958)



2. Huskerville (1946-Present) 
– University of Nebraska housing project for student veterans of World War II; included single men, and married men plus their families. (“They are Moving In,” The Nebraska State Journal, Lincoln, Nebraska, 15 Sept. 1946, p. 3) 
– William F. And Robert W. Kurth of Lexington; James F. Erwin of Omaha
– An FPHA project at the army airfield (LJS, 03 Oct. 1946)
– Max Swan, housing manager of Huskerville (formerly of FHPA, then affiliated with the University): “The University of Nebraska has a much better housing situation than most universities…with its steam heat, hot running water and hard wood floors.” (LJS, 03 Oct. 1946)
– In 1946, according to the Lincoln Journal Star, there were about 700 applicants wanting to live in Huskerville’s 253 family units. (LJS, 03 Oct. 1946)
– 70 singles students were already living in their quarters, despite the capacity being 250 persons. (LJS, 03 Oct. 1946)
– Day nursery for working mothers (LJS, 03 Oct. 1946)
– Weekly bus tickets for those residents of Huskerville that need to go to campus for class (LJS, 03 Oct. 1946)
– In 1952, residents of Huskerville were perplexed and frightened by a string of paralyzations and illness within their community. Polio was spreading in Huskerville. By the end of the year, two Huskerville children perished and 18 residents were paralyzed. It was not until 1956 that researchers from the University of Nebraska determined that the Huskerville polio outbreak was not spread from person-to-person. Instead, the cause was back-siphonage from improper toilet repairs. It was around the same time in the mid-1950s that Huskerville’s population steadily declined. (Breanna Fanta, “1952 Huskerville Polio Outbreak,” History Nebraska) 
– Lincoln Air Force Base was fully de-activated by 1968 when the Air Force negotiated the breaking of the 99-year contract with the City of Lincoln. The Lincoln Airport Authority took control of the base in 1970. In 1971, the Arnold Heights housing area was open to the public. 

~~~~
Huskerville started as a Federal Public Housing Authority project immediately after World War II to house military veterans ¬– many of whom were University of Nebraska students – near the Lincoln Army Airfield. Huskerville boasted its own private bus route, cafeteria, post office, grocery store, and movie theater among other social outlets.

The neighborhood could accommodate single men and married men with families. 250 units were converted from World War II-era officer quarters and made available to single men with rent set at $10 per month.  

When the project first commenced, nearly 700 families applied to live in one of Huskerville’s 253 family units. These units were converted from the former base hospital. Perhaps what attracted such a volume of applicants was the persistent advertising promising “much better housing situation than most universities…with its steam heat, hot running water and hard wood floors,” or the “good food at low cost” at the Huskerville cafeteria, or the steady bus service between the neighborhood and campus, or the availability of a children’s daycare to aid working parents. At its peak, Huskerville became the fifth largest town in Nebraska. 

In 1952, residents of Huskerville were perplexed and frightened by a string of paralyzations and illness within their community. Polio was spreading in Huskerville. By the end of the year, two Huskerville children perished and 18 residents were paralyzed. It was not until 1956 that researchers from the University of Nebraska determined that the Huskerville polio outbreak was not spread from person-to-person. Instead, the cause was back-siphonage from improper toilet repairs. It was around the same time in the mid-1950s that Huskerville’s population steadily declined.

Huskerville was torn down around 1966 and, according to some newspapers, a housing crisis for married Huskers ensued. The land, as a University-affiliated housing enclave, was taken over by the Lincoln Airport Authority in the 1970s after the de-activation of the Lincoln Air Force Base in the late-1960s. Today, Huskerville is still a populated area of northwest Lincoln where community development and airport business are conducted side-by-side.


“Room Space Still Available in Huskerville,” The Daily Nebraskan, 20 September 1946, p.4.
“They are Moving In,” The Nebraska State Journal, Lincoln, Nebraska, 15 Sept. 1946, p. 3
“Huskerville Housing Open for Veterans,” The Daily Nebraskan, 26 September 1946, p. 1. 
“Veterans’ Huskerville Boasts Own Facilities,” The Daily Nebraskan, 03 October 1946, p.4. 
“Housing Bureau Reveals Facilities,” The Daily Nebraskan, 08 December 1946, p. 1. 
“The plight of student tenants,” The Daily Nebraskan, 19 May 1971, p. 3. 
LJS, 03 Oct. 1946
(Breanna Fanta, “1952 Huskerville Polio Outbreak,” History Nebraska)



3. Lincoln Air Force Base/Lincoln Army Airfield (1952-c.1966): https://www.lincolnafb.org/close.php
– After heavy post-war demobilization, the Korean War sparked an urgent need to reactivate Lincoln Army Airfield and turn it into Lincoln Air Force Base and a Strategic Air Command bomber base; the civilian Lincoln airport remained operational during the Cold War
– Branting, Lincoln Air Force Base Legacy Project
– Branting, A Mighty Force for Peace, pp. 9-34
– On April 16, 2021, the governor of Nebraska temporarily “reopened” the Lincoln Air Force Base to house the 55th Wing while the outfit’s traditional home, Offutt Air Force Base, undergoes a multi-million-dollar runway renovation. It was the latest in a long relationship between the Lincoln Airport Authority, the Nebraska Air National Guard, and Offutt Air Force Base in the 21st century. (“Officials welcome Offutt planes to temporary home – ‘Lincoln Air Force Base’,” Lincoln Journal Star, 16 April 2021)

Lincoln Army Airfield (1942-1945): 
Goeres, 127-129.		

Lincoln – along with eleven other Nebraska towns – was home to an army airfield that trained mechanics, pilots, and flight crews starting in 1942. One major activity at these bases with bombardment practice, similar to the exercises near the Nebraska State Fairgrounds only a few decades before. Despite being officially de-activated in 1945, the area still served in some military-related capacity between throughout the late 1940s and early 1950s. 

Lincoln Air Force Base (1954-c.1966): 
Goeres, 129-130
Branting, https://www.lincolnafb.org/history.php; A Mighty Force for Peace, 80-81.



After heavy post-war demobilization, the Korean War sparked an urgent need to reactivate the Lincoln Army Airfield and convert it into the Lincoln Air Force Base (LAFB) as well as a Strategic Air Command bomber base. 

In the early 1950s, the United States Air Force reactivated the former Lincoln Army Airfield. Oak Creek was diverted and a two-mile-long runway was built to accommodate military jets. Other infrastructural improvements were made to the now-outdated airfield. New barracks, mess halls, recreation facilities, warehouses, and weapons bunkers each signaled in their own way that the Cold War had come to Lincoln. KUON, a Lincoln television station, document these projects along with other happenings at LAFB with a weekly show that premiered in 1958 entitled, “Wings Over Lincoln.” 

The base primarily housed particular types of bombers that would be deployed in the event of a nuclear attack, a program known as “nuclear deterrence.” In the 1960s, Lincoln witnessed a new level of Cold War omnipresence, even as commercial air traffic continued to flow out of Lincoln Municipal Airport. Throughout southeastern Nebraska, supersonic nuclear defense missiles were installed in towns surrounding Lincoln. 

For more information about the dynamic social life in and around LAFB, see Bowling Lake and Huskerville.

On April 16, 2021, the governor of Nebraska temporarily “reopened” the Lincoln Air Force Base to house the 55th Wing while the outfit’s traditional home, Offutt Air Force Base, undergoes a multi-million-dollar runway renovation. It was the latest in a long relationship between the Lincoln Airport Authority, the Nebraska Air National Guard, and Offutt Air Force Base in the 21st century.



-- Full text of "Broadcasting Telecasting (Jul-Sep 1958)"
See other formats
Scanned from the collections of 
The Library of Congress 

Packard Campus 
for Audio Visual Conservation 
www.Ioc.gov/avconservation

Motion Picture and Television Reading Room 

www.loc.gov/rr/mopic 

Recorded Sound Reference Center 
www.Ioc.gov/rr/record 

KUON-TV Features SAC Base 

A series of seven programs describing the 
activities of the Lincoln, Neb., Air Force 
Base has been undertaken by KUON-TV 
Lincoln in cooperation with the base pub- 
lic information office. Titled Wings Over 
Lincoln, the series uses film inserts and fea- 
tures live presentations by Strategic Air 
Command personnel. The programs, seen 
on Thursday nights, have shown preparations 
for a flight mission, survival, the body in 
flight and the city of "Lincoln Air Force 
Base." Program director is KUON-TV's Al 
Hotaling. (Broadcasting: The Businessweekly of Television and Radio, 14 July 1958, pp. 203)





4. Lincoln Municipal Airport (LNK) – “Flader Tract” 
– Tract chosen in 1928; construction completed in 1929; dedication in 1930
– Modern facility constructed in 1974




5. Former State Fairgrounds (1901-2009)
– Biplanes were constructed and air shows conducted on these grounds throughout the 20th century
– Former headquarters of Nebraska Aviation Corps, organized in Lincoln in July 1915 // "Their early maneuvers included the experimental dropping of bombs from the flying airplanes."
– Lincoln Standard Aircraft Company manufactured planes in the Industrial Arts Building here starting in 1919

~~~~~
Biplanes – aircraft with two fixed wings, one above the other – were manufactured in the Industrial Arts Building starting in 1919 at the Nebraska State Fairgrounds. The site also served as the former headquarters of the Nebraska Aviation Corps, which was organized in Lincoln around 1915. Among the various military exercises, servicemen practiced dropping (fake) bombs from flying airplanes. Active between 1901 and 2009, the Nebraska State Fairgrounds in Lincoln also hosted numerous flying shows during its many state fairs. Today, the University of Nebraska-Lincoln’s Innovation Campus is at this location.




6. Arrow Aircraft Airfield (1930-unknown)
Arrow Aircraft Corporation (Goeres, 56-57)
Havelock, NE (later annexed into Lincoln)
•	First airplane completed in 1926
•	1927: first Arrow Sport 
•	Thriving by 1929 with new investors
•	Orders coming in from home and abroad
•	Then a fire at the Le Blond engine plant created a shortage of engines for plane production, leading to cancelled orders
•	The Great Depression cancelled even more orders 
•	Production of Arrow Sport was shut down in 1932
•	Arrow Aircraft went out of business by the early 1940s



7. Arrow Aircraft Factory




8. Union Airport

A major airport in Lincoln during the first-half of the 20th century, Union Airport also housed the Lincoln Airplane and Flying Schools flight lessons. An official Lincoln Airplane and Flying School bus would take students between the mechanic school at 24th and ‘O’ streets and Union Airport. 


9. Pester Airport
– Dr. Charles E. Carothers, dentist and aerial acrobat, crashed his plan here in November 1985. He later died in early 1986of the severe injuries he suffered from the crash.
– Carothers' obituary from Lincoln Journal Star, Friday, 03 January 1986, p. 7.




10. Sky Ranch Subdivision
– "A half-dozen residents of Sky Ranch, a much older subdivision near 112th and Holdrege, can park their airplanes in hangars built into their basements — and there’s a runway a stone’s throw away...Beechcraft Road is just off Cessna Lane, not far from Cessna Circle and Piper Way. You get the picture. Every street in the 28-house subdivision, built around 1970, is named after a popular aircraft model. Six houses have hangars."
– Lincoln Journal Star, Algis J. Laukaitis, 28 November 2005, https://journalstar.com/news/local/sky-ranch-subdivision-boasts-plane-hangars/article_5b393049-9597-5465-a606-515af3081c28.html 





11. Page Field/Lincoln Country Club

This plot served as Ray Page’s first flying field for the Lincoln Standard Aircraft Company before the construction of the Lincoln Country Club. It was at this site that Charles Lindbergh learned to fly. 


12. S. 14th Street Field

The second home to the Lincoln Standard Aircraft Company. This site functioned as a stopping point along one of the transnational airmail routes. An airplane crash in 1926 caused by poor lighting sparked the movement to build a “modern” airport – a goal eventually achieved with the construction of Lincoln Municipal Airport two years later. 



13. H, Z, B Factory (1919-c.1921)
– University of Nebraska students Brooks Harding, Abe Zook, and Errold Bahl established this airplane manufacturing and repair shop in July 1919. The company, headed by Lt. Errold Bahl, also advertised flying lessons in The Daily Nebraskan, the University’s newspaper. Bahl and his partners designed and built the Lark monoplane, and advertised it as an airplane for the “average man.” In May 1920, Bahl even took Executive Dean of the University of Nebraska on an aerial campus tour.
– “University Students Will Build Airplanes,” The Daily Nebraskan, 02 February 1920.
– “Dean Engberg Looks Down Upon University,” The Daily Nebraskan, 21 May 1920.

University of Nebraska students Brooks Harding, Abe Zook, and Errold Bahl established this airplane manufacturing and repair shop in July 1919. 

In the summer of 1919, three University of Nebraska students and local aviators named Brooks Harding, Abe Zook, and Errold Bahl established an airplane repair and instruction shop at 107 N. 9th Street in downtown Lincoln. The trio barnstormed in surrounding states, performed in air shows, repaired airplanes, and taught other aviation-minded Lincolnites how to fly. Harriet Long Stotts was one of those students. She worked for Harding, Zook, and Bahl in 1920. Stotts also took flying lessons from Bahl, placing her in contention for perhaps being Nebraska's first female pilot. The company, headed by Lt. Errold Bahl, also advertised flying lessons in The Daily Nebraskan, the University’s newspaper. Bahl and his partners designed and built the Lark monoplane, and advertised it as an airplane for the “average man.” In May 1920, Bahl even took Executive Dean of the University of Nebraska on an aerial campus tour.


14 Lincoln Standard Aircraft Co., Inc. etcetera 
– "E.J. Sias helped found Lincoln Auto and Tractor School in 1918. By 1929, it was Lincoln Auto and Airplane School. Later, the Lincoln Airplane and Flying School incorporated as the Lincoln Aeronautical Institute. The Lincoln Aircraft Company, Inc., was always a separate business with separate ownership.”
– Goeres, Wings Over Nebraska, pp. 54-55


Nebraska Aircraft Corporation – a main competitor of Harding, Zook, and Bahl – was created by three businessmen in 1919. In an effort to create powerful yet reliant planes, the owners purchase a large stockpile of WWI-surplus airplanes and engines. The first of these airplanes was manufactured in the Industrial Arts Building on the old Nebraska State Fairgrounds. By 1921, the businessmen fell behind on their loan payments. Rumor suggests that one of the founders fled to Mexico with the company's assets. Consequently, creditors tapped a local salesman, Ray Page, to take control of the company in 1922 - renaming it Lincoln Standard Aircraft Company.

In addition to producing planes, Lincoln Standard also provided flying lessons. Its most famous student was Charles Lindbergh, who enrolled at the school in 1922 and first learned to fly, parachute, and barnstorm in Lincoln. Later in the decade, the schooling branch of Lincoln Standard was purchased by E.J. Sias, who re-named it the Lincoln Airplane and Flying School while Lincoln Standard remained under the supervision of Page. 

On March 30, 1930, the Lincoln Airplane and Flying School was officially approved by the US Department of Commerce: Aeronautics Branch. The Lincoln Airplane and Flying School operated out of two locations: the recently constructed municipal airport housed the flight training program, while mechanics training took place at the company’s headquarters in downtown Lincoln at 2409 ‘O’ Street). The school briefly provided flight instruction to army cadets in 1939, before the Army Air Corps, “deterred by a particularly harsh Nebraska winter,” opted to move the training program to Lakeland, Florida, the following fall. The facility closed in 1945, but the mantle of flight instruction in Lincoln was quickly taken up by other aviation-minded entrepreneurs.

Page sold Lincoln Standard in 1929 to a group of Omaha investors. Unfortunately, the Great Depression compounded the increase in government flying regulations prompted the company to move operations out of Lincoln to Kansas City.


Goeres, 48.


OMAHA

1. Ak-Sar-Ben Airfield 

2. Offutt AFB 
